In January of 1953, a tidal surge
shook the North Sea.
The titanic waves flooded
the Dutch coastline,
killing almost 2,000 people.
54 years later, a similar storm
threatened the region.
But this time, the Netherlands
were ready.
As the water swelled,
state-of-the-art computer sensors
activated emergency protocols.
Over the next 30 minutes,
a pair of 240-meter steel arms
swung shut,
protecting the channel ahead.
Using 680-tonne ball joints,
the barrier moved in rhythm
with the shifting wind and waves.
By morning, the storm had passed
with minimal flooding.
The first field activation
of the Maeslantkering
had been a resounding success.
As one of the planet’s largest mobile
structures,
this storm surge barrier
is a marvel of human engineering.
But the Maeslantkering is just one part
of a massive,
interlocking system of water controls
known as the Delta Works—
the most sophisticated flood prevention
project in the world.
The Netherlands has a long history
with water management.
The country lies along the delta
of three major European rivers,
and nearly a quarter of its territory
is below sea level.
This geography makes the region
extremely prone to flooding.
So much so, that some of the earliest
Dutch governing bodies
were informal “water boards” that
coordinated flood protection projects.
But after the storms of 1953, the Dutch
government took more official measures.
They established the Delta Commission,
and tasked them with protecting
the entire southwestern region.
Focusing on densely populated cities,
their aim was to reduce the annual odds
of flooding below 1 in 10,000—
about 100 times as safe
as the average coastal city.
Accomplishing this lofty goal required
various infrastructure projects
along the southwestern coast.
The first line of defense was to dam
the region’s flood-prone estuaries.
These large inlets fed many of
the country’s rivers into the North Sea,
and during storms they allowed
flood water to surge inland.
Using a series of dams, the Delta
Commission transformed these estuaries
into expansive lakes that serve
as nature preserves and community parks.
However, this solution wouldn’t work
for the Nieuwe Waterweg.
As the lifeblood of the local shipping
industry,
this passage had to be kept open
in safe conditions,
and barricaded during storm surges.
In 1998, the completed Maeslantkering
provided the flexible
protection necessary.
Alongside additional barriers,
like grassy dikes and concrete seawalls,
these fortifications made up the bulk
of the Delta Works project,
which was primarily focused on
holding back ocean storms.
But in the following decades,
the Dutch pursued additional plans
to complement the Delta Works
and protect against floods further inland.
Under the "Room for the River" plan,
farms and dikes were relocated
away from the shore.
This left more space for water
to collect in low-lying floodplains,
creating reservoirs and habitats
for local wildlife.
This strategic retreat not only
decreased flood risk,
but allowed for the redeveloped
settlements
to be built more densely and sustainably.
Perhaps no city embodies the Netherlands'
multi-pronged approach to water management
as much as Rotterdam, a thriving city
almost entirely below sea level.
When a storm threatens,
densely populated older districts
are protected by traditional dikes.
Meanwhile, newer districts
have been artificially elevated,
often sporting green roofs
that store rainwater.
Numerous structures around the city
transform into water storage facilities,
including parking garages and plazas
which normally serve as theaters
and sports arenas.
Meanwhile in the harbor, floating
pavilions rise with the water level.
These are the first of several planned
amphibious structures,
some of which house water purification
systems and solar collectors.
These strategies are just some
of the technologies and policies
that have put the Netherlands
at the cutting edge of water management.
The country continues to find new ways
to make cities more resilient
to natural disasters.
And as the rising sea levels
caused by climate change
threaten low-lying cities
across the world,
the Netherlands offers an exceptional
example of how to go with the flow.